Logistic regression is a statistical analysis used for predicting categorical outcomes in a data set.
It's used quite often in machine learning and also in mechanistic interpretability.
In this lecture, I will introduce you to the idea and interpretation of logistic regression, and I'll
also show you the Python code to visualize and implement the analysis.
So yeah, you use a logistic regression when the dependent variable, also called the DV, can only
take on one of two values like true or false.
Alive or dead, win or lose, and so on.
Now these have to be mutually exclusive categories, meaning that both categories cannot be simultaneously
true in the same data measurement.
The logistic regression framework can be extended to any number of categorical outcomes, in which case
it's generally called a multinomial logistic regression.
Now this is actually the basis of the loss function when training LMS.
But here in this and the next videos we're just going to be working with binary outcomes.
So that also simplifies the analysis quite a bit.
Now one thing to keep in mind which I will demonstrate in the code, is that logistic regression on
its own does not actually classify any data.
What the logistic regression does is calculate the probability that a data point belongs to a particular
category.
You would then take those numerical probability scores and apply some threshold to actually make a category
prediction.
So the probability values range from 0 to 1, and you would typically use a value of 0.5 as a threshold
for prediction.
Again, I'll show that in the code in a few moments.
But first, I want to describe a little bit about the math of a logistic regression.
The logistic regression initially looks a little bit like a regular regression, in that we have predictor
variables that are the x's in this equation.
And then we have the coefficients.
Those are the beta values including a beta zero term which is called the constant or the intercept.
So this is the model of the data on the right hand side.
Now in a regular standard regression the left hand side would be the predicted data value, like a test
score or height, or the price of a house with a logistic regression.
What you actually want to predict is the log of the probability that a data value is in one of the categories.
Now, if you're wondering why we use the log of the probabilities and not just the actual probability,
then that's a great question and I will answer it soon.
But first I want to show you how this equation gets transformed so that we can actually use the model
to generate a probability of being in one of the two categories.
Essentially, this just involves solving for p the probability of being in one of the categories.
The first step is to get rid of the natural log, and we do that by taking the natural exponent of both
sides of the equation.
So then you get e to the all of this stuff up here.
The next step involves isolating p and solving for p.
Now there is a little bit of algebra that I'm skipping over here, but essentially you end up with one
over one plus E to the minus all of the regression expression in here.
So this is the form of the logistic equation.
And now we need to solve for the betas so that we can apply this equation to each individual data sample
and get a probability value.
And so how do we actually do that.
How do we find the values of the betas that give us the best probabilities that most closely match the
predicted categories?
Well, typically a regression analysis is optimally solved using the left inverse algorithm.
However, that algorithm only works for linear models.
And here we have nonlinearities in the coefficients.
So the left inverse method doesn't work, or at least not directly.
So instead a A solution is to use iterative approximations until you get a good solution.
There are several ways to do iterative solutions.
You can use a local linearization and then apply linear least squares approximations.
You can use gradient descent to find a solution in PyTorch, for example.
However, it is quite common to use the iterative linear approximation method using a library called
Statsmodels, and when you use Statsmodels for logistic regression, it also provides a lot of useful
statistical and diagnostic information.
Now, I still haven't told you yet why the logistic regression is based on log probabilities and not
the probabilities themselves.
The reason is actually the same reason why we use log probabilities when training models, which I explained
earlier in the course.
And the answer is quite simple, actually.
Probabilities themselves are bound between 0 and 1, whereas log probabilities have a much larger range.
Furthermore, small probabilities that are close to zero can be numerically unstable and difficult to
work with, whereas log probabilities are just much easier.
You end up with larger numbers, so they're easier to represent and calculate.
And that's basically what this text says over here.
There actually is a third reason as well, which is that to measure the conjunction of probabilities
you need to multiply probabilities.
But you can also equivalently add their logs.
I explained that in the section about quantitative evaluations.
Actually that third point is not directly relevant for us here with logistic regression, but it is
just another general motivation for using log probabilities in machine learning.
Okay.
So that is all of the background that I'm going to provide about logistic regression.
Let me now paint the broad strokes of what I'll show in the Python demo.
And then we'll actually switch to code.
I'm going to create fake data for two different categories.
You can pretend that these are activation magnitudes for neurons in an MLP layer for nouns and verbs.
In the next video, we will use real data to see if we can identify MLP neurons that are tuned to proper
nouns.
But here in this video, to keep things simple and also to allow you to manipulate the data and the
effect sizes, we're just going to work with some simulated data.
So anyway, you do see that there is some nice separation such that the verbs get higher activation
than the nouns.
It's not a perfect separation because there's some noise in here, but it certainly does seem like this
neuron has generally stronger activation to verbs compared to nouns.
Of course, in this case it's a trivial effect because I literally coded this effect size.
But this is the kind of plot that you can make with real data.
So then I will create a design matrix of independent variables and a dependent variable where the independent
variables are the data values and the dependent variable is the category label.
You can visualize all the data in a plot that looks like this.
So this plot shows the data sample on the x axis.
I generated 30 samples in each of the two categories, and the y axis for the blue circles shows the
activation value from one neuron for the 60 different tokens that it was processing.
And then the X's correspond to the category label, which is always dummy coded to be zero for one label,
like the nouns and one for the other label like the verbs in this case.
So the idea is that all of these blue dots should predict zero.
And all of these blue dots should predict one.
So then I will take all of these data, put them into a statsmodel logistic regression, where the goal
will be to find a set of beta parameters for the logistic regression equation that pushes these values
as close to zero as possible.
And these data values, these activation values in the blue circles as close to one as possible.
Here you see a summary table that the Statsmodel library produces.
Now there's a lot of detailed statistical information in this table.
If you've taken a statistics course before, then you should recognize a lot of these parameters.
But for our purposes here in this course, you don't need to worry about most of these.
Mainly you want to look for the coefficient and the p value.
And really just for the, uh, the term other than the constant term, the constant is the intercept.
And we really don't care about this.
This just tells us where the whether the activation values are different from zero.
What we do care about is this X1 term here.
And you want to see the sign of the coefficient.
So whether it's positive or negative and the p value whether it is close to zero indicating statistical
significance or whether it's greater than 0.05, indicating that there is no statistically significant
prediction.
Now we can visualize the results using a plot that looks like this.
This initially looks like the plot of the data that I previously showed, but I'm not actually showing
the activation values here.
Instead, I'm showing the probabilities that the output of the logistic regression provides.
So you can see that the y axis now goes from 0 to 1.
And the value for each of the data samples is the probability that that data sample belongs to category
one.
So what you want to see in this kind of a plot is that, for example, here the first 30 samples, the
first blue 30 blue circles should all have a probability value less than 0.5, indicating that they
are predicted to be in category zero.
And all of these data values above 30 should have a prediction or a probability value close to one,
indicating that they belong to a condition one.
You can see visually that the accuracy is overall fairly good, though certainly not perfect.
There are some data values that were actually nouns, but the model predicts that they are verbs, and
there are some data values that were verbs, but the model predicts that they are nouns.
So then the last thing that we will do in the code demo is quantify this verbal description that I just
gave to come up with a percent accuracy of prediction.
Okay, let's switch to code and have a look.
I will use three libraries here numpy for working with the numbers, matplotlib for the plots, and
here we have the statsmodels library.
It's often abbreviated as s for statsmodels.
Here's where I generate the data.
So 30 samples per category.
And there's two categories.
Again, these are all fake generated data.
But we are imagining that they correspond to the activations of some neurons in a language model.
Okay.
And I'm initializing them to be numpy.random normal.
So normally distributed numbers with a mean of zero for the nouns and a mean of two for the verbs.
And here you see is the plot.
Now all of the jitter on the x axis is purely for visualization.
That just makes it look a little bit nicer.
For example, if I would get rid of that, or maybe I'll just divide this by some ludicrously large
number just to make it a little easier to code.
Uh, in my opinion, this kind of a plot looks a little bit uglier.
I think it's a little bit less aesthetic, but also a lot of dots are drawn on top of each other, so
you don't really see the density of the plots.
And that is why I like to add a little bit of noise jitter.
Anyway, one thing that I like about using simulated data to explore statistical analysis methods is
that you can control the effect sizes.
So for example, if you would change the average for the verbs to be one, then you can see that there's
more overlap.
There's still clearly some distributional shift in the data, but there's more overlap.
And so there's going to be less of a really clear ability of the model to, uh, to classify the data.
So I will let you play around with that later.
I'm going to leave it as two just for the demonstration here.
We have an outlier.
I think I'll just run this again.
Okay.
So there we go.
Another outlier.
Well, whatever.
I'll just leave it in there.
Okay.
Here is where I'm building the logistic regression.
So what we need to do is combine all of the data into one vector.
So here the data are 30 numbers and 30 numbers.
But I'm stacking them together to create one vector of 60 numbers.
Here I'm adding the constant.
This is the intercept term.
This is actually just a vector of all ones.
As I mentioned briefly, the intercept term really just accounts for the fact that the distribution
of all of the data can be non centered.
So it can have an average activation value other than zero.
And that's what the constant uh captures.
In general in most analyses and most statistics you do not care about the constant.
You need to include the constant term.
But you generally don't worry about interpreting it.
And we are certainly not going to interpret it here.
So that's the model.
Here are the labels.
This is what we are trying to predict.
We want to predict zeros or ones corresponding to nouns and verbs.
Okay.
And then here is uh yeah.
Just showing the sizes of these two matrices.
And here is the code to generate the plot that I showed.
Again the idea is that the category corresponds to the red x's.
It's all zeros or ones.
And these are the actual data in the blue circles.
So what you want is to find a model that will take all of these data values and push that into zero.
And all of these data values and push those to one.
And this one here I'm sure is going to be a incorrect prediction.
Okay.
So once we have the data, once we have our design matrix, it's really easy to run a logistic regression.
In Statsmodels you use small logit logit with a capital L, and this creates an object which you can
then fit.
And in fact you often don't even need.
You know, most of the time you can actually do something simpler like this and say result equals like
this.
That's even simpler.
So there you go.
We have the model and we can fit it.
Here we see the results.
Again, you generally don't want to worry about interpreting the constant.
The only thing this tells us is that the data have a average other than zero.
Instead, you want to interpret this.
The sign of the coefficient and the p value of the coefficient.
So we see that this is positive.
That means that the values are going to be larger for category one and smaller for category zero.
Now if you're just running one logistic regression from one neuron in the LM, then you can literally
just show this table and read it off.
You know, read off these numbers and write them down somewhere.
But, you know, Llms have a lot more than one neuron.
They have billions of neurons.
And so we want a way to extract this information manually.
And that's what we do here with the we can extract result dot p values and result dot params for parameters.
And that gives us the p values and the coefficients.
So these are the p values or.
This one is for the constant.
We don't care about that one.
We're interested in this one and we're interested in this beta value over here okay.
So now we can do the classification.
That's what I showed here.
Again the ideal result here is that all of these values here go down to zero.
And all of these values over here go up to one.
So the y axis here is the probability that each data sample is in category one.
So for this data point over here the model calculates that the probability that this data sample belongs
to category one is like zero something very close to zero.
So therefore it must be in category zero okay.
And then these are in category one because the probabilities are very high.
So calculating accuracy is actually really straightforward once you've gotten to this step over here.
Oh I forgot to show you this is yet result dot predict.
So remember result is the output of the fitting.
That's the variable that we get from fitting.
And dot predict is what applies the logistic regression equation to the data values and returns the
probability values.
Okay.
So result dot predict.
That's how we get these blue circles over here.
Anyway we have a threshold of 0.5.
And we just say are these values greater than or less than 0.5.
It is that simple.
So here we have let me walk you through this piece by piece.
I will say result dot predict.
And that gives us the predictions.
These are values that range between 0 and 1.
We can say if it's greater than 0.5 here we can say or here the result is lots of falses in the beginning
and lots of trues in the end.
And this is just telling us that these data values are not greater than 0.5, so they're less than 0.5.
And some of these values are.
And then we want to set this equal to y to see which ones actually match the category label.
And you want to do this because yeah, I set up this analysis so that the first 30 samples are in category
zero and the next are in category one.
But in practice this might be mixed.
You might have category zero and one mixed all over the place.
So that's why you want to set this equal to the labels.
So basically everywhere you see this is true.
That is a correct prediction.
Everywhere it's false.
It's an incorrect prediction, including this last outlier here at the very end.
That is an incorrect prediction.
So now if we want to know the overall accuracy, then we can just average all of these together, which
I do here.
So you can see that the average accuracy was 87% 86%.
Now once you have all of these data, you can actually use them to go into an incredible amount of detailed
investigations with a lot of granularity.
For example, as I've mentioned multiple times, these are fake data.
So the fact that this is an incorrect prediction is not interpretable.
But let's imagine that these were real data.
And these data really came from a model.
And these were different tokens.
Let's say these were 60 tokens that the model was processing and these were the nouns and these were
the verbs.
So if these were real data, the model really got this one wrong.
So then it could be interesting to find which of the tokens were incorrectly classified, and then you
could go back to the text and look and try to characterize or try to understand why this verb was actually
categorized as a noun.
And maybe that will be insightful for model functioning.
Logistic regression is a great analysis to be familiar with and to know how to code.
We will use it quite a bit in the next video, and the video after that, and the next several sections.
As I mentioned before, there are multiple Python libraries that can implement logistic regression using
slightly different algorithms and so on.
Statsmodels is great because it's easy to set up, it's fast, it gives a lot of detailed information,
and it's convenient to work with.